our planet is a place full of color from
reds oranges yellows greens blues
Indigo's and violets we see a rainbow of
colors in the world around us but that's
pretty much all we see and that's
because human vision is limited to a
narrow spectrum of visible light
now either side of that band you have
ultraviolet and infrared light these are
not visible to the human eye but can be
detected using a very simple piece of
equipment that even you can use at home
this is a black light it emits
ultraviolet light which when shined on
some everyday objects causes them to
fluoresce in some pretty interesting
ways should we test it out cut the
lights so we have laundry detergent
petroleum jelly banknotes tonic water
which looks almost radioactive and birds
wait what
I first heard about Birds hidden
patterns early this year when news that
puffin bales may fluoresce under UV
light called the internet by storm more
amazing still is that puffins are far
from unique a huge range of birds
including parrots penguins and owls also
glow and do UV light so to find out
which bird glows the brightest and which
bird you should take to a rave we've
come to the Natural History Museum here
in ring which has one of the world's
largest food collections home to around
750,000 specimens which represents 95
percent of the world's bird species so
I'm here with Alex head curator of the
bird collection here maturing and Jamie
ornithologist who brought UV puffins to
the world's attention so Alex what
specimens do we have here we've got a
variety of specimens that we can look at
today we've got an Atlantic puffin of
course crested auklets from the North
Pacific cockatiel which was collected by
John Gould in Australia in the 1840s of
course the budgerigar and a northern
Rockhopper penguin from Tristan da Cunha
and Jamie your research is all about UV
puffins how did that research come about
we knew that birds could see to some
degree in the UV spectrum and looking at
the bell of Atlantic puffin it's really
clear that tens of thousands of years of
sexual selection have kind of given them
this beautiful Bell and yeah it felt
like a good thing to try that's fine so
you've looked at alive and dead
specimens have you had any problems
looking at alive puffins they they do
walk around a little bit so we're not
sure what the kind of effect is that
shortwave UV light has on the eyes of
birds so it was kind of important that
we developed something to protect their
eyes just just to make sure so we
developed these kind of glasses and the
idea is that this all kind of bends and
will sit over the eyes of the puffins
like that but that doesn't cover the
bits that fluoresce on live specimens
which is which is this bit here which is
the sir and this middle line here which
is the lamellar
I'm pretty keen to get these specimens
under the blacklight Alex would you like
to pick one first I I think we should
start with the Rockhopper penguin okay
should we take it into the blacklight
let's have a look at them like so if we
can have the lights off please you can
see oh my gosh that's amazing
okay so there's those crests really lit
up why would they be so fluorescent so
they're used in make choice so the
bigger your crests the better chance of
finding a high quality mate they occur
in both of the sexes so it's probably
part of that sexual signaling would you
see that in other penguin species yeah
yeah so there's six different species of
crested penguins like the Northern Rock
hopper and they probably all exhibit
this trait so those that's really
important fluorescents neat choice
brilliant should get another one in done
let's have one yeah
[Music]
we've got crested auklets as well these
guys are related to puffins and they're
the same family and like a puffin well
the birds are likely to see is this kind
of big contrast so there's very little
UV light be reflect off the black
plumage against the Bell which is
fluorescing so we've got a specimen here
that I think will absolutely knock your
socks off okay mister our eyes these are
cockatiel wings they're not normally
this white but this one was from
captivity
we'll see what it looks like mmm
I'm intrigued okay let's have a look
like so oh my goodness me so because
this wing is is completely white it
lacks the melanin so it's allowing that
yellow pigment to really shine through
which you can see under UV it looks
amazing so impressive
while his hidden markings might be news
to us they won't come as much of a
surprise to other birds and that's
because unlike us many birds have
adapted to see UV light outside of the
human visible spectrum we have tried
chromatic vision meaning we have three
different types of cone cells in our
retina that can detect blue green and
red wavelengths of light
now birds have tetrachromatic vision
meaning they have four different cones
that can not only detect blue green and
red but also shorter wavelengths such as
UV or violet light so what does the
world look like to a bird well it's
still impossible to say even with these
specialist cameras and lighting that can
detect these UV signals we still can't
conceive the combination of colors that
a bird can see take someone who is
red-green color blind as 8% of men in
the UK are now you're properly familiar
with the Ishihara test and most of you
watching can see the number on this card
but if you put a filter on it which
simulates red-green color blindness this
is what you see now if someone who is
colorblind has dichromatic vision
meaning that their perception of color
is formed from just two different types
of cones this is often caused by defect
of red and green cones making
colors appear indistinguishable and
making everyday scenes take on an
entirely different complexion safe
instance each cone is thought to be able
to detect a hundred different gradients
of color and all colors we perceive are
combinations of signals from various
cones those with dichromatic vision can
detect ten thousand different gradients
of color those with trichromatic vision
can detect a million different gradients
of color and those with tetrachromatic
vision like birds can detect
theoretically around a hundred million
different gradients of color so just as
someone with red-green color blindness
can't picture how the world looks like
to someone with trichromatic vision
neither can we truly understand how the
world looks like to a bird should we
bring over all three of the parrot
species maybe start with a budget car
under the blacklight see what they look
yeah
[Music]
so I've heard of the study where it's
actually using sunscreen block the
fluorescence essentially on Rodriguez
what would be the premise of that so I
think that as I said earlier
fluorescence is part of a repertoire of
kind of coloration available to birds
and there had to be a way that we test
whether that fluorescence had anything
to do with make choice so the way to do
that if you block out that fluorescence
altogether with in this case with Sun
cream and and then see whether the male
but he's are still attractive to the
female bodies which it turns out they
were less attractive so why does
elaborate plumage colors and
fluorescence really kind of show sexual
prowess why is that so important so I
guess that these species have to have
some way of showing off to potential
mates to they very kind of good quality
and all things that plumage in color and
size shows that you have excessive
energy to spend on those things it kind
of shows off that you don't need to
spend your energy on I'm being healthy
because you can afford to invest it on
things like fluorescence yeah so you
know taking humans as an example you
might have an ox house a fancy car you
know really nice-looking clothes you've
got that sort of expendable income above
just sort of typical self maintenance
and for essence is just a part of that
that's just one of the many tools that
birds have in their disposal
so I think you'll agree a few fantastic
examples of fluorescence but this isn't
the bigger picture is it so so all we
saw today is we're just looking at the
byproduct of how would you be like
interacts with these places we have no
comprehension whatsoever of any light or
indeed what these birds are see when
they look at each other yeah
so in reality a puffin doesn't look like
a puffin to other puppets so from the
numinous bills to fluorescent feathers
birds are even more amazing than we can
see with our own eyes I'm only just
discovering the range of UV displays and
the reasons behind them and while we may
never understand what the world looks
like through the eyes of birds we do
know that if you go to a rave don't
forget to pack your parakeet
[Music]